It is November the 20th, and we're checking to see that it works.
Now just say a sentence or two.
I'm going to on.
On, yeah.
Okay.
Let's see if it's working now.
This is November the 20th, the year 2000, a beautiful College Station Day, and I have the pleasure and honor of chatting with John Greer.
a long time and very respected faculty member in architecture.
John, for the sake of the people who might hear this tape at some future date and or read the transcription, describe first your background and experience before you came to A&M as a student.
What did mom and dad do and where did you all live and where did you go to high school?
Well, I went to high school in Port Arthur, Texas.
My mother and father were both public school teachers.
My father was a school principal for a long time.
Then my father was elected the county tax assessor of Jefferson County, Texas and served in that capacity about 13 years, I think, while mother continued teaching and she moved into Lamar University and taught Summit.
The college level mother was an English teacher.
And my father was mostly an administrator, I suppose, would be fair.
Finished high school what year?
Finished high school in 1952.
And then came immediately to Texas A&M University.
Why did you come to A&M instead of some other place?
I didn't understand I had any other options.
The kids seem to agonize over that these days, but my father told me one day in the living room, I recall vividly, because he said, you're pretty good at math and you're pretty good at drawing and
You might ought to consider architecture, and I did at that moment, first time I'd ever heard the word probably, and now our one, as we say.
I came here.
Did you come to visit ever as a prospective student?
Yes, I did come to visit and visited my uncle, who was Fred Bryson.
And Fred Bryson at that time was the next door neighbor to Ernest Langford, longtime neighbors and old people of a similar generation.
So I got to meet my department head and the famous man, he was even famous then, when I was a freshman, before I started school here.
So he knew me and I knew him early.
I've got to tell you some Langford stories before we're through.
Don't forget that.
Yes, we want those.
We'll get those later, while he was your teacher.
He was.
When you came up to enroll, how did you get here?
Did mom and dad bring you?
Did you come on the train or the bus?
I didn't come on the train.
I never have ridden a train, as a matter of fact.
I want to do that so bad I can hardly wait.
No, we didn't use the train.
I suspect that my family brought me.
I don't recall that, actually.
But every other trip from then to graduation was hitchhiking back and forth to Port Arthur.
We'll talk about hitchhiking in a second.
And several of us hitchhiked sort of together a lot.
Do you remember what you brought with you in the way of stuff when you came to enroll that first time?
Of course.
I brought a mechanical equipment set.
And a slide rule, as I recall.
And what else did I bring?
Not many clothes because I was in the Corps of Cadets, which was mandatory then.
And so we didn't need a whole lot of clothes.
In fact, probably most of the clothes I did bring ended up taken home at the first opportunity because we didn't need them here.
And was your major that first year, did you identify yourself as an architecture major?
Yes, but I actually enrolled in engineering because architecture only started accepting people in September.
And the fact was I came in January, so I was a midterm guy.
And so I had to do something until following September.
So I actually was in the class of 55 by A&M's classifications, but ended up taking most of my classmates were in the class of 56.
And you were in the Corps then that spring semester.
Yes.
Was there a special nickname for?
Yes, Frog.
I was a frog.
Oh, a frog, although you were not a transfer.
No.
No, frog simply meant anyone that came at midterm.
What frog meant was you missed the football season hazing.
Now, that's the fact of the matter.
But the fact of the matter also is that when I came here as a 7, 18, whatever it was, year old person, I had no idea that I'd missed anything.
You know, I came, I graduated from high school and came to Texas A&M.
I didn't know any better.
Except that I had a good first semester in engineering.
I would have probably waited, tried to find a job or something or do something and come back and come in the fall.
But I didn't know anybody at the time, so I just went to school.
And then in fall, you were identified as an architecture major.
Yes.
Who helped you pick out courses?
No one.
If you're going to ask me, I think, about some things that have changed since I got here,
I picked out my courses.
I read the catalog and read it from front to back.
It wasn't very much reading, actually, and it didn't seem particularly complicated, and the curricula was pretty straightforward and laid out, so there wasn't a lot of choice to be made for several years.
At least two years, maybe three.
So I never had a counselor or an advisor or anything of the kind.
except that I was fairly close with the department head, and if I ever had any need to, I knew I could go and see him, but I never did about that kind of business.
Now, at that time, architecture was a big department within the School of Engineering, as it was then.
Was it a School of Engineering?
Yes, yeah, because it was A&M College.
That would be true.
That'd be true, yeah.
And do you have any idea how many students there were?
In the architecture program, I think about 100.
That'd be pretty close.
That'd be five years of about 20 people per class on average.
That's probably close, maybe 150.
Describe some of those first classes you took in architecture.
Were any of them particularly, as you look back, especially important to you?
The very first classes?
My best recollection of the first classes I took was that they all seemed to be basically repeats of things I had had in high school.
And that included analytical geometry and trigonometry and English and all of those kinds of things I thought was basically, they were easy for me.
So I had made awfully good grades in my first year.
Okay.
But what about the architecture courses?
The architecture courses were
taught by graduate students at the time.
I didn't know any better.
I didn't learn until many years later that the people that taught them were just barely older than me, but they seemed older at the time.
And they were funny.
We took our first courses in what we call the shacks, the old military barracks on the north part of the campus.
And we had a couple of those buildings, as I recall, at least one, but I think we had two.
And so we took those courses over there, and it was like being in bivouac.
It was like being out someplace.
And most of the courses we took were in the academic building quadrangle area.
History was in one of those buildings, I know.
Math, English, I think we're all in the academic building.
But we didn't take architecture courses in the academic building until our second year, which was my third year, actually.
Was there any way, any effort to get you architecture students together?
All of the students?
Or to help the freshmen bond together?
No.
I don't recall any.
The upperclassmen had what was called ASABAB in those days.
How did you know that?
ASABAB, I believe.
ASABAB.
Associated Architecture School, Annual Boark Ball or something like that.
And people have tried to recreate Boark's balls for years, but they've never gone by that
acronym again, quite like that.
But that was fun and entertaining.
Nevertheless, it was not much of a mixer.
It was just a big blowout party.
In your freshman, sophomore year or so, if you needed any advice about anything, to whom did you turn?
I guess the most fair thing to say would be you turned to someone in your military outfit.
one of the upper-classmen or something like that.
But we didn't do much of that, actually, except for my friends and my roommate and that kind of person.
My roommate was a high school classmate of mine, so we've been close friends for a land.
He lived in the same block with me in Port Arthur, so we knew each other even before high school.
When did you begin to feel really committed to architecture?
When and how?
I can't remember ever not being committed to it, but it wasn't like a religious calling or something.
It just sort of happened and it worked out.
I was never discouraged because my grades were always pretty good, so I didn't feel like I was misplaced somehow.
Who were some faculty members that now you realize were important to you in their influence?
I counsel my kids all the time about these matters, and I now know that two or three, I had two or three professors that were not particularly good at what they were doing, but I learned an awful lot from them.
I learned, which I can now say in retrospect, because I learned if I were ever in the same situation, things I would not do.
I would try to do better or differently.
But they were very nice people, most of whom were mayors of College Station at one time or another.
Nicky Holloman was one.
Nicky was blessed as a sweetheart of a man, but he wasn't much of a teacher.
Dick Vrooman, who's still around here, was my sophomore teacher.
Back in my day, there was only one section of each architecture class, so we had Dick Vrooman for the sophomore year in architecture.
About how big were those sections?
No more than 20, I wouldn't think.
25, maybe.
But we would have them both fall and spring term.
He'd be our year prof. Now, that's only in the design studio.
That would not include the materials classes and structures and all those kinds of things were separate.
And my third year prof was Nicky Holloman.
That's H-O-L-L-E-M-A-N.
That's M-O-N, I think.
Oh, yeah.
H-O-L-L-E-M-O-N.
Like the street.
The street's named after him.
And Broman is V-R-O-M-A-N.
Two O's.
Vrooman, some people call him.
And then my fourth year professor was Frank D. Lawyer.
And Frank Lawyer was traded by Ernest Langford and Bill Cadell.
They traded Lawyer and Romanek.
I watched them do that.
Not many people know that that actually happened that way.
Lawyer was a wonderful designer and went on to become the lead designer for CRS, the architecture firm down in Houston.
And he's a form giver, as we call him.
He's one of those guys that can just do form over and over and do it all the rest of his life and do it beautifully.
But he wasn't much of a teacher.
either.
He could sit down and do it for you, and it was always nice to see that done, but it wasn't yours, so it didn't work.
And my fifth-year prof was Edward John Romanek.
I learned last night, because Romanek is in Polish, and means those that came from Romania.
To Poland.
That's R-O-M-A-N-I-E-C.
Romanek and lawyer.
were literally traded like baseball cards between Frank, I mean, Bill Caudel, who had his firm here at the time just beginning, and Ernest Langford.
And I was beneficiary of the trade.
Lawyer went to CRS, and Romney came from CRS into the school, and he started teaching at the fifth-year level, and that's where I was.
At the time, so we were Mr. Romanek's first class at this institution.
Describe him as a beginning teacher.
As a first-year teacher?
Well, actually, it was his third teaching job.
It was his first year here.
First year here.
He taught at Oklahoma State and at someplace else, I don't recall right now.
He was awfully good.
He was a mystery man.
Romanek has been the kind of guy that 50 years of former students or 40 years of former students have sat around and said, the man never said anything.
He never made any sense.
He never made a sentence that you could understand what he's talking about.
And then after he would leave your company, before very long, you'd have this bright idea, this really smart, wow, I could do it this way.
And it took most of us years and years and years to actually realize that something he said triggered that response.
But we never knew quite what it was.
But we all thought he was a great teacher.
And I had the good fortune of having him on my faculty when I was department head for a little while.
And I got to watch him from the other side.
Mr. Romanek gave, Mr. Romanek was mean and tough.
and scary, and we thought he was really old.
He was 13 years older than we were.
But he was a Chicago guy, just come down from New York or via Oklahoma.
But he was a rough kid, and we were all afraid of him.
Describe him physically.
What did he look like?
Oh, he was a little short Polish fella.
Not very tall, had very thin hair, but combed it in one of those great swooping front wave things.
I don't know how he made his hair stay that way, but he did.
And a bit eccentric.
Quite eccentric.
We've got lots of good Romanek stories.
Everybody's got good Romanek stories.
Share two or three of them.
Oh, my word.
Most of them have to do with bars.
You may not want this on your tape, Haskell.
Romanek.
One of the things that Ramanick is most noted for around here is taking students out from this campus, getting them out of here, getting them to the east, getting them to Mexico, getting them away from this place, even overseas.
And most of the time when he took people out, he entertained them as well.
I knew Romnick for nearly 40 years probably, and I never ever bought a meal or a drink.
He always bought them.
And at some point when I was department head or in the dean's office,
and he was working supposedly under me, beside me.
I finally told him, I said, Romerick, you've got to let me buy sometimes.
Come on now, I get to buy sometimes.
And he says, no, you've never caught on, John.
This is called the pass it along theory.
You don't buy for me.
I buy for you.
You buy for the people coming behind you.
And you don't ever let them buy.
That's how you pay me back is you pass it back to the people coming behind you.
And he did that to countless people.
Countless people.
And we do it now all the time.
We don't let any former student or kid pick up a tab for anything.
Anyway, Romanek had just come back from one of his trips with some former students and
They ended up over to his apartment and were having some of his famous Martoonies.
And Romnick managed to get drunk.
And they had gone off in a car and they came back.
When they came back, he lived over here at University Terrace Apartments just south of the golf course on what was then Jersey, now George Bush Drive.
When he went into the parking lot there,
And he was a dean at the time.
And you have to remember that the president was Earl Rudder, who had gone to New York to hire him personally, which we all kind of thought was cute.
He and Fred Benson flew to New York to interview Romanek and hired him on the spot and brought him back.
And the word around here was, oh, my God, guess who they're bringing back with him, you know?
Anyway, he pulled up into the parking lot over there.
And in those days, cars had fenders that wrapped outside the car, little bumpers that wrapped outside the car.
And he had pulled up in this parking garage, which was made out of little two-inch pipe columns, little pipe things, and had a corrugated top on it or something.
He pulled in there, and he realized, apparently, I wasn't there, but he realized, apparently, that he had gotten in a little crooked.
And so he thought he had back up, and cars at that point just had gotten a little, what he called those gears, beside the stick shift, the other kind.
Anyway, the car lurched a little bit and hit the car
that he was pointing at on the right-hand side as he was pulling in this parking place.
He hit that car, and he quickly threw it into reverse and started backing up.
And when he did, his bumper caught the little pole that was holding up the parking garage.
He pulled down the whole, before he was through, he had pulled down the whole parking garage.
Eighteen cars or something were damaged.
And, of course, the police showed up, and he loved to ride around in his car.
I can't see how people stand to do this, but he loved to ride around in his car with his window about half up.
Not down, not up, just half up.
And this was the first car that he had had, and most of us had at that time, with fingertip window things.
And he hadn't quite learned which one was which yet.
Indeed, a policeman showed up on the scene.
Mr. Romanek was still in the car.
And the policeman showed up and put his fingers, put both hands, I understand, up on the window.
And we're saying, Mr. Romnick or whatever, you need to get out of the car.
We need to talk here a minute.
And Romnick was fiddling with a window thing and rolled his fingers up in the window like that.
And the people that were there said the policeman just looked awful like Romnick was just probably going to drive off with him with his fingers up in the window like that.
Anyway, he was constantly doing things like that.
And the next morning, of course, he had to report to General Rudder to report why the police were over at his place.
And he had damaged 18 cars behind his place over there.
He was beautiful.
As an instructor, did he have any guidelines for you students?
What did you all know that he expected from you?
We never did know.
I think that was part of what made him scary, because we didn't know.
I watched him one day when I was department head, and he'd gone up to look at a student's work that was in his class, and it was probably just like our class.
And he walked over, and he looked at his work, and he said, unacceptable.
And this was a pretty nice looking thing the student had created.
And he just said, unacceptable.
And he turned around and walked off, and the student was following Mr. Romnick.
What is wrong?
I said, there are no dots.
No dots?
I don't know what you're talking about Mr. Roy.
What do you mean no dots?
I finally found out what he was talking about and I went back and told the student, he said he couldn't see any columns.
This has no structural identity.
He couldn't identify immediately how your structural system was going to work.
No dots.
That's all he could think of.
That was what would show on the plant is this little dot thing.
Anyway, he was a non-communicative guy.
Nice
And I was going to tell you a minute ago, he gave nearly everybody in our class that came to class A's.
And most of us, A's were not customary in those days, just to have almost a class full of A's.
Of course, we were fifth-year people.
Nevertheless, what he did, and I watched him do this over 30 years, what he did was he encouraged, and we're talking about a subjective field here.
We're not talking about the answers right or wrong.
What he did was he made people believe that they were better than they believed they were themselves.
And then they became better because he set a standard and everybody wanted to please him.
All their life they wanted to please him.
He told me when I left here, this is one of your facts, he told me when I left this place, told our whole class when we left here, he said, don't you go to work for anybody for less than $3 an hour.
And if you do, you're going to embarrass me and you just don't even call back.
You just don't even let me know where you are if you go to work for anybody for less than $3 an hour.
And the going rate then was about $2, $2.50, somewhere in that range.
But he said, you're a Romantic graduate and you'll work for $3 an hour or you won't work.
I went to work for 250 and I was afraid to call back.
I was afraid to let the man know where I was.
But of course I did later on and I quickly exceeded that and everything was fine.
He didn't follow through with his bluffs.
He just scared you to death.
Like my standards are just a little higher than the rest of the world's and certainly higher than most of the other faculty and I expect you to set high standards for yourself and live up to them.
That was the message that somehow you had to glean out of all of that.
As you finished your undergraduate degree here, how well prepared did you feel you were to be an architect?
The minute I walked out here, I didn't feel like I was prepared at all.
And I tell my kids today, part of it is called senioritis.
I don't think I've learned anything.
I don't think I'm ready for this.
But the fact of the matter is you've learned a lot more than you think you have and that you can recall at the time.
And you've certainly, in this particular field, you've learned many lessons about holistic things, putting things together, thinking complexly and envisioning what's happening above and sideways and all at the same time.
And that is not taught necessarily.
It's practiced, developed, but it's not a teachable skill, I don't suppose.
But we were better prepared than we thought we were.
As you look back now, knowing what you know now, what did the architecture program do best, and what might it have done better then?
Well, I was privileged to start just behind the people that graduated in what would be called a Boart system, or the classical system, studying the orders and things like that, just behind them.
Bill Caudell was on this faculty for a little while and taught some people that were about 10 years older than me and they drew the classical columns and shaded them with ink watercolor wash and the beautiful drawings just absolutely wonderful but it was a different kind of school but that changing of the kind of school was just happening in that
20-year period all over the country so that we were we were just getting into what was being called modernism and that was to begin to think about the building and its place in the environment which is completely different idea than the building will have six columns across the front and all that pretty well set you had very little to do
So in that regard, I thought the school did pretty well with us.
Compared to the other, the graduates you encountered of other architectural programs in this region, was A&M up to date compared to them?
Oh yes, yes, yes, I think so.
In fact, I think it's fair to say that we've had a reputation all of my professional life of being the best of the best.
We're pretty good in the technological areas, and we're pretty good in the design or the creative areas.
And some schools tend to lean one way or the other, but we have a tradition, a history, pretty much going down between the two.
And I think that's something I've taken a good deal of pride in.
And I think we still do that to some degree.
So you graduated when?
Graduated in 57.
57, and about how many of that...
of your fellow freshman architecture majors were with you when you graduated?
There were probably 15 in our class and at some point or another there were probably 50 in the class or something like that.
Now you're not turning that off are you?
I don't think I'm playing with this other side over here.
So old architects like to talk about the attrition rate just being awful.
But we had just begun with, the school had just begun with fiddling around with options sort of thing, different tracks, so that many of my classmates
went into what was called the construction option at the time, which is now our Department of Construction Science.
The first head of the Department of Construction Science, James Hyde Marsh III from Orange, Texas, was one of the people that had slid over into that construction science major, construction option at the time.
Dick Vrooman, the sophomore design teacher, had the job of sorting us out at the end of the sophomore year.
and saying you go to design, you go to construction, you go and design, you go in construction.
And you know what we said when he said that?
Yes sir.
We didn't question it, we didn't get counseled about which is which or what it means or anything of the kind.
For the design people,
We thought it sort of meant that those other guys were basically being flunked out of the architecture program and put over into some secondary thing.
But the fact is they have out-earned us by a factor of probably three over the years.
It was a good field and a whole bunch of really good people went into that field.
But design has always sort of been the king in architecture.
The designer is the franchise player.
So anyway, we didn't attrition like a lot of schools did.
Many of the people that left our architecture program simply slid over into an optional program in our program.
But we lost a few.
We lost a few.
So you graduated, and then what came next?
Graduated and then I went to, when did I do the Army?
Oh, I did the Army in 59 to 61, so I went and worked for a year someplace.
59 to 61 then was in the United States Army stationed at Fort Bliss, Texas.
Never left Texas.
And that was part of your... One of the amazing things.
Part of your carryover having been in the Corps?
Yes.
Because I was a commissioned officer at the time.
And it was the first time this little Texas boy became aware of the fact that the people that came to Fort Bliss from California had traveled less distance than I had traveled from Port Arthur, Texas to get there.
This was a 750 mile trip or something from Port Arthur.
A long drive.
But we did the Army thing.
I'll talk about being prepared for things.
I think we were better prepared for the Army than we were for architecture when we got out of Texas A&M.
But we were actually pretty well prepared in both.
I chose, I didn't choose anything in the Army.
I just was assigned and went to the Army.
I didn't try to opt out to go fly this or that.
I didn't try to get into the Corps of Engineers, which where most people in this business sort of wanted to try to get into.
However, the most successful people in our business today did their military career accidentally in the Surgeon, whatever the Medical Corps is in the Army.
and and got involved with big hospitals and things like that and now they are commissioning big hospitals we're talking billion dollar hospitals now all over the world so that if a person if we look back in hindsight today say that's where you should have gone not the corps of engineers and wandering around out there in the mud building bridges or something but anyway I didn't do any of those things I just went into the into the regular army and and I sort of did it on purpose
because I didn't want to be so directional, so much more architecture, architecture, architecture.
I wanted to do something.
If I was going to take it, let's do an opportunity, and I did, and I was in guided missiles, which was a really neat thing.
We were doing computerized things before the computers were